.TH TALER\-MERCHANT\-BENCHMARK 1 "Mar 5, 2019" "GNU Taler"

.SH NAME
taler\-merchant\-benchmark \- Generate Taler\-style fake payments.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B taler\-merchant\-benchmark
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ options ]
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtaler\-merchant\-benchmark\fP is a command line tool to populate your merchant database with fake Taler\-style payments.

.SH SUBCOMMAND
.B
.SS ordinary
Generate normal payments: all the payments are performed (by the default instance) and aggregated by the exchange.
Takes the following options.

.B
.IP "\-p PN,  \-\-payments\-number=PN"
Perform PN many payments, defaults to 1.

.B
.IP "\-t TN,  \-\-tracks\-number=TN"
Perform TN many tracking operations, defaults to 1.

.B
.SS corner
Drive the generator to create unusual situations, like for example leaving payments
unaggregated, or using a non-default merchant instance.  Takes the following options.

.B
.IP "\-t TC, \-\-two\-coins=TC"
Perform TC many payments that use two coins (normally, all the payments use only one coin).  TC defaults to 1.

.B
.IP "\-i AI, \-\-alt\-instance=AI"
Use AI as the instance, instead of 'default' (which is the default instance used.)

.B
.IP "\-u UN, \-\-unaggregated\-number=UN"
Generate UN payments that will be left unaggregated.  Note that subsequent invocations of the generator may pick
those unaggregated payments and actually aggregated them.


.SH COMMON OPTIONS

.B
.IP "\-m URL, \-\-merchant\-url=URL"
Use URL as the merchant base URL during the benchmark.  The URL is mainly used to download and pay for contracts.

.B
.IP "\-b URL, \-\-bank\-url=URL"
Use URL as the bank's base URL during the benchmark.  The URL is used to test whether the bank is up and running.

.B
.IP "\-c FILENAME,  \-\-config=FILENAME"
Use the configuration and other resources for the merchant to operate from FILENAME.

.B
.IP "\-h, \-\-help"
Print short help on options.

.B
.IP "\-v, \-\-version"
Print version information.

.B
.IP "\-l LF, \-\-logfile=LF"
Sends logs to file whose path is LF.

.B
.IP "\-L LOGLEVEL, \-\-log=LOGLEVEL"
Use loglevel LOGLEVEL.

.SH BUGS
Report bugs by using Mantis <https://gnunet.org/bugs/> or by sending electronic mail to <taler@gnu.org>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBtaler\-merchant\-dbinit\fP(1), \fBtaler\-merchant\-tip\-enable\fP(1), \fBtaler.conf\fP(5)
